New Event Hook guide with Hookdeck (#2857)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/guides/event-hook-hookdeck/main/index.md

* Understand the Okta Event Hook calls and responses.
* Implement Okta Event Hooks using a local application and the Hookdeck utility.
* Preview and test an Okta Event Hook and review the call details with Hookdeck.

**What you need**

* [Okta Developer Edition organization](https://developer.okta.com/signup/)
* A local application. Or see [Create a local application](#create-a-local-application) in this guide to install the sample code application.
* The Hookdeck utility. See [Install Hookdeck](#install-hookdeck).

**Sample code**

* See [nodejs-webhook-server-example](https://github.com/hookdeck/nodejs-webhook-server-example) for this project's sample code. Installation instructions are available in the next section, [Create a local application](#create-a-local-application).

---

## Create a local application

<StackSelector snippet="sample-app" noSelector/>

## Install Hookdeck

If you already have Hookdeck installed, move on to [Run Hookdeck](#run-hookdeck). If not, follow the installation instructions at [Using The Hookdeck CLI](https://hookdeck.com/docs/using-the-cli) to install in your sample application folder (or the location of your choice).

Some installation notes:

> * You don't need to have an account to install and run Hookdeck, but creating a free account provides more features as well as API authentication.

Author: Well, not really for demo purposes. Similar to leaving out Basic Auth when defining the hook. For a production or regular test environment, yes, it is. We leave up to the developer.

* The installation uses the [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) package manager.

### Run Hookdeck

> After installing Hookdeck, ensure that it's running by creating a "tunnel" into a local port (1337 in this example). Run the following command in your terminal:

Author: Good catch! Thanks.

```terminal
nodejs-webhook-server-example> hookdeck listen 1337
```

Complete the interactive session that follows to define the information about the Hookdeck session:

> * **What source should you select?**

Author: It was inconsistent with me, as well. I'll leave for now as this is how Hookdeck documents the process.

    Enter: `Create new source`

* **What should your new source label be?**

    Enter: `okta`

* **What path should the webhooks be forwarded to (i.e.: /webhooks)?**

    Enter: `/okta-webhooks-endpoint`

* **What's the connection label (i.e.: My API)?**

    Enter: `My Okta Response Server`

With this data, Hookdeck creates a session and URL to use for sending requests. If you see the following content in your terminal, Hookdeck is running successfully:

![A screen shot of a terminal that displays a Hookdeck session status. The session status contains urls that tunnel into the local port.](/img/hookdeck-and-event-hooks-session.png)

> > **Note:** Copy the forwarding **Webhook URL** that is available from the Hookdeck terminal session. For example, `https://events.hookdeck.com/e/src_s8lCGfojGBPj8L0lszAZl6fD`. You'll use this URL when setting up your Okta Event Hook.

Author: Yes, we go over this in the Event Hook set up procedure. The PM wanted to highlight this URL,  so, users would know what URL to use later on. But instead of making it a task, I'll remove "Copy", and make it more of a "note", i.e.: 

**Note:** You'll use the **Webhook URL** that is available from the Hookdeck terminal session when setting up your Okta Event Hook.

See [Hookdeck](https://hookdeck.com/) or their [Product docs](https://hookdeck.com/docs/introduction) for further information.

### Review Hookdeck dashboard

The Hookdeck dashboard provides an opportunity to review all calls to your local application. See [Browsing Events](https://hookdeck.com/docs/browsing-event) for details on using this interface. With the Hookdeck utility running, use the dashboard URL to access details on your hook calls: `https://dashboard.hookdeck.com/cli/events`.

> Each call to your local application appears in the dashboard and includes the response body, header, and other details:

Author: Resolved!

![A screen shot of the Hookdeck web dashboard that includes the response body, header, and other details.](/img/hookdeck-dashboard.png)

## Create an Okta Event Hook

Create the Okta Event Hook to work with your local application, which can now be exposed externally. The Event Hook must be set up and verified within your Okta Admin Console.

### Set up the Event Hook

1. Sign in to your [Okta org](https://login.okta.com/).

2. From the Admin Console, go to **Workflow** > **Event Hooks**.

3. Click **Create Event Hook**. The **Add Event Hook Endpoint** dialog box opens.

4. In the **Name** field, add a unique name for the Hook (in this example, "New User Event Hook").

5. In the **URL** field, add your external service URL from Hookdeck. For this example, use the **Webhook URL** highlighted after running Hookdeck, see [Run Hookdeck](#run-hookdeck). For example, your URL should appear similar to: `https://events.hookdeck.com/e/src_s8lCGfojGBPj8L0lszAZl6fD`.

    >**Note:** Hookdeck generates the URL when creating the session and incorporates the local application's hook endpoint as part of the unique URL. That is, the endpoint is not explicitly defined as part of the URL.

> 6. Leave the **Authentication field** and **Authentication secret** values blank in this example. However, to add Basic Authentication, add the application code required at [Add Basic Authorization and Body Parsing](/docs/guides/common-hook-set-up-steps/nodejs/main/#add-basic-authorization-and-body-parsing) and then enter the following values for those fields:

Reviewer: Maybe add the a new line before the "However"? This is an alternative step that could confuse the user?

    * **Authentication field** = `authorization`

    * **Authentication secret** = `Basic YWRtaW46c3VwZXJzZWNyZXQ=`

7. In the **REQUESTS** section of the dialog box, subscribe to the Event Type you want to monitor. In this example, a user created in the Okta org: `User created`.

8. Click **Save & Continue**.

9. With your Hookdeck session and local application running, complete the one-time verification Okta call at this time or verify the Event Hook later.

> 

Author: This is a good point. Maybe a bit of an over-explanation of what is, in essence, a very simple process.  I think I'll make this more of an informational para, rather than a the appearance of a task-based, as you mentioned.

The Event Hook is now set up with a status of **VERIFIED** and is ready to send Event Hook calls to your external service.

## Preview, test, and review the Event Hook

With your local application now exposed externally through a Hookdeck session, you can preview and test Okta Event Hook calls, as well as review details of the calls using the Hookdeck dashboard. The Okta org is also set up to call your local application when an event is triggered. In this example, the event triggers when a user is added to your Okta org.

### Preview

To run a preview call of your Event Hook:

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Workflow** > **Event Hooks**.
1. Locate the Event Hook you created during the set-up step. In this example, select `New User Event Hook` or the name you gave the Event Hook.
1. Click the **Actions** menu for this hook, and select **Preview**.
1. In the **Configure Event Hook request** section, select an event from the **Event Type** drop-down menu. In this example, there is only one: `User Created (user.lifecycle.create)`.

> 1. The most recent event populates the **Preview & Deliver Event Hook** section with the JSON body of the Event Hook if there is one. You can also select an older event from the **System Log Event** drop-down menu. If no event is available, the JSON body populates with sample data.

Reviewer: The instructions to select an older even from the **System Log Event** is not clear - maybe you can show me how this part works?

Author: Maybe over-explanation again. If, for example, you've added 4 or 5 people, those 4 or 5 events appear in the drop-down menu, and you can choose among them for the preview JSON. I'm going to remove that content.

   ![A screen shot of the application terminal with response body output to the console.](/img/hookdeck-application-console-output.png)

1. Review your Hookdeck terminal output for a line item reference to the specific call and a unique dashboard URL to the details on the call.

   ![A screen shot of the Hookdeck terminal with response line item output to console.](/img/hookdeck-terminal-output.png)

1. Review your Hookdeck dashboard (`https://dashboard.hookdeck.com/cli/events`). Each call recorded by Hookdeck appears in the interface from which you can review the complete call response body, header, and other details.

    ![A screen shot of the Hookdeck dashboard that includes body details.](/img/hookdeck-dashboard-small.png)

### Test

To run a test of your Event Hook:

1. Ensure that both your Hookdeck session and local sample application are running.
1. In your Okta org, sign in as an administrator and create a test user in the Admin Console.
    * Go to **Directory** > **People**, and click **Add Person**. As an example, add the user Jane Doe with the following fields:
        * **First Name:** Jane
        * **Last Name:** Doe

>         * **User Name:** jane.doe@hookdeckexample.com

Author: True. Maybe a topic of discussion for the team. In terms of standard tasks (OK, save, edit, delete, etc.) do we need to explicitly call things out? But will add for now.

---
title: Event Hooks with Hookdeck
excerpt: How to demonstrate Event Hooks using Hookdeck to expose a local app to the internet.
layout: Guides
---

<StackSelector />

> This guide provides a working example of an Okta Event Hook. It uses the Hookdeck utility to expose a local application to the internet and receive and respond to Event Hook calls. Event Hooks are outbound calls from Okta that can notify your own software systems of events occurring in your Okta org. The Hookdeck utility enables the testing of Event Hooks locally, rather than implementing an internet-based production or test external service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide provides a working example of an Okta Event Hook. It uses the Hookdeck utility to expose a local application to the internet and receive and respond to Event Hook calls. Event Hooks are outbound calls from Okta that can notify your own software systems of events that occur in your Okta org. The Hookdeck utility enables the testing of Event Hooks locally, rather than implementing an internet-based production or test external service.
```

---

**Learning outcomes**

* Understand the Okta Event Hook calls and responses.
* Implement Okta Event Hooks using a local application and the Hookdeck utility.
* Preview and test an Okta Event Hook and review the call details with Hookdeck.

**What you need**

* [Okta Developer Edition organization](https://developer.okta.com/signup/)
* A local application. See [Create a local application](#create-a-local-application) in this guide to install a sample code application.
* The Hookdeck utility. See [Install Hookdeck](#install-hookdeck).

**Sample code**

> * See [nodejs-webhook-server-example](https://github.com/hookdeck/nodejs-webhook-server-example) for this project's sample code. Installation instructions are available in the next section, [Create a local application](#create-a-local-application).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [nodejs-webhook-server-example](https://github.com/hookdeck/nodejs-webhook-server-example). Installation instructions are available in [Create a local application](#create-a-local-application).
```

---

## Create a local application

<StackSnippet snippet="sample-app" />

## Install Hookdeck

> If you already have Hookdeck installed, move on to [Run Hookdeck](#run-hookdeck). If not, follow the installation instructions at [Using The Hookdeck CLI](https://hookdeck.com/docs/using-the-cli) to install in your sample application folder (or the location of your choice).

Reviewer 2: Using The Hookdeck CLI << should the heading be "Use" to keep all the heading titles consistent

Some installation notes:

* You don't need to have an account to install and run Hookdeck, but creating a free account provides more features as well as API authentication.

### Run Hookdeck

After installing Hookdeck, start a session to forward your Event Hooks to a local port (1337 in this example). Run the following command in your terminal:

```terminal
nodejs-webhook-server-example> hookdeck listen 1337
```

> Complete the interactive session that follows to define the information about the Hookdeck session:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Complete the following interactive session to define the information about the Hookdeck session:
```

> **Note:** You'll use the **Webhook URL** that is available from the Hookdeck terminal session when setting up your Event Hook. For example, `https://events.hookdeck.com/e/src_jHlvbIjGsgY2xhYZeCGxohK4`.

See [Hookdeck](https://hookdeck.com/) or their [Product docs](https://hookdeck.com/docs/introduction) for further information.

### Review Hookdeck dashboard

The Hookdeck dashboard provides an opportunity to review all calls to your local application. See [Browsing Events](https://hookdeck.com/docs/browsing-event) for details on using this interface. With the Hookdeck utility running, use the guest account **Login URL** to access details on your hook calls. For example, your initial guest account URL appears similar to: `https://api.hookdeck.com/signin/guest?token=5sszlk2ndmkp5puy07uixrqtatkzvhwc13gctx9o3gmgczcrfu`.

Each call to your local application appears in the dashboard and includes the response body, header, and other details:

![A screen shot of the Hookdeck web dashboard that includes the response body, header, and other details.](/img/hookdeck-dashboard.png)

### Hookdeck development workflow

> Hookdeck URLs are reusable and permanent (when you create a free account) and serve the entire development lifecycle&mdash;from development to staging to production. For further information on using Hookdeck, see [Development Workflow](https://hookdeck.com/docs/dev-workflow).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hookdeck URLs are reusable and permanent (when you create a free account) and serve the entire development lifecycle&mdash;from development to staging to production. See [Development Workflow](https://hookdeck.com/docs/dev-workflow) for more information on using Hookdeck.
```

## Create an Okta Event Hook

Create the Okta Event Hook to work with your local application, which can now be exposed externally. The Event Hook must be set up and verified within your Okta Admin Console.

### Set up the Event Hook

1. Sign in to your [Okta org](https://login.okta.com/).

2. From the Admin Console, go to **Workflow** > **Event Hooks**.

3. Click **Create Event Hook**. The **Add Event Hook Endpoint** dialog box opens.

4. In the **Name** field, add a unique name for the Hook (in this example, "New User Event Hook").

> 5. In the **URL** field, add your external service URL from Hookdeck. For this example, use the **Webhook URL** highlighted after running Hookdeck, see [Run Hookdeck](#run-hookdeck). For example, your URL should appear similar to: `https://events.hookdeck.com/e/src_s8lCGfojGBPj8L0lszAZl6fD`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. In the **URL** field, add your external service URL from Hookdeck. For this example, use the **Webhook URL** highlighted after running Hookdeck. See [Run Hookdeck](#run-hookdeck). For example, your URL should appear similar to: `https://events.hookdeck.com/e/src_s8lCGfojGBPj8L0lszAZl6fD`.
```

    >**Note:** Hookdeck generates the URL when creating the session and incorporates the local application's hook endpoint as part of the unique URL. That is, the endpoint is not explicitly defined as part of the URL.

6. Leave the **Authentication field** and **Authentication secret** values blank in this example.

>     However, to add Basic Authentication, add the application code required at [Add Basic Authorization and Body Parsing](/docs/guides/common-hook-set-up-steps/nodejs/main/#add-basic-authorization-and-body-parsing) and then enter the following values for those fields:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    However, to add Basic Authentication, add the application code that is required at [Add Basic Authorization and Body Parsing](/docs/guides/common-hook-set-up-steps/nodejs/main/#add-basic-authorization-and-body-parsing) and then enter the following values for those fields:
```

    * **Authentication field** = `authorization`

    * **Authentication secret** = `Basic YWRtaW46c3VwZXJzZWNyZXQ=`

> 7. In the **REQUESTS** section of the dialog box, subscribe to the Event Type you want to monitor. In this example, a user created in the Okta org: `User created`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. In the **REQUESTS** section of the dialog box, subscribe to the Event Type that you want to monitor. In this example, a user created in the Okta org is `User created`.
```

Reviewer 2: The last part was a fragment. I fixed it, but please double-check whether it's correct. Thanks.

8. Click **Save & Continue**.

9. Complete the one-time verification Okta call at this time by clicking **Verify**. You can also verify the Event Hook at later time. See [Event Hook verification](/docs/guides/event-hook-hookdeck/#event-hook-verification).

### Event Hook verification

You must verify the Event Hook to prove that your external service controls the endpoint. See [One-Time Verification Request](/docs/concepts/event-hooks/#one-time-verification-request).

>**Note:** Hookdeck includes the capability to verify your endpoint, and no code is necessary for your local application.

To complete the one-time verification of the Event Hook:

* After creating the Event Hook, click **Verify** to complete the one-time verification step.

or

* Go to the Event Hooks table, click the **Actions** drop-down menu of your **UNVERIFIED** Event Hook, and select **Verify**.

The Event Hook is now set up with a status of **VERIFIED** and is ready to send Event Hook calls to your local application through Hookdeck.

## Preview, test, and review the Event Hook

> With your local application now exposed externally through a Hookdeck session, you can preview and test Okta Event Hook calls, as well as review details of the calls using the Hookdeck dashboard. The Okta org is also set up to call your local application when an event is triggered. In this example, the event triggers when a user is added to your Okta org.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With your local application now exposed externally through a Hookdeck session, you can preview and test Okta Event Hook calls, and review details of the calls by using the Hookdeck dashboard. The Okta org is also set up to call your local application when an event is triggered. In this example, the event triggers when a user is added to your Okta org.
```

### Preview

To run a preview call of your Event Hook:

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Workflow** > **Event Hooks**.

> 1. Locate the Event Hook you created during the set-up step. In this example, select `New User Event Hook` or the name you gave the Event Hook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Locate the Event Hook that you created during the set-up step. In this example, select `New User Event Hook` or the name you gave the Event Hook.
```

1. Click the **Actions** menu for this hook, and select **Preview**.

> 1. In the **Configure Event Hook request** section, select an event from the **Event Type** drop-down menu. In this example, there is only one: `User Created (user.lifecycle.create)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In the **Configure Event Hook request** section, select an event from the **Event Type** drop-down menu. In this example, there is only `User Created (user.lifecycle.create)`.
```

1. Review your Hookdeck dashboard (`https://dashboard.hookdeck.com/cli/events`). Each call recorded by Hookdeck appears in the interface from which you can review the complete call response body, header, and other details.

    ![A screen shot of the Hookdeck dashboard that includes body details.](/img/hookdeck-dashboard-small.png)

### Test

To run a test of your Event Hook:

1. Ensure that both your Hookdeck session and local sample application are running.
1. In your Okta org, sign in as an administrator and create a test user in the Admin Console.
    * Go to **Directory** > **People**, and click **Add Person**. As an example, add the user Jane Doe with the following fields:
        * **First Name:** Jane
        * **Last Name:** Doe
        * **User Name:** jane.doe@hookdeckexample.com

1. Click **Save** to create a new user. The new user triggers an Event Hook call.

1. Navigate back to your local application's console. The request body for this call appears in the console, as designed by the local application code.

1. Review your Hookdeck terminal output for a line item reference to the specific call and a unique dashboard URL to the details on the call.

> 1. Review the unique dashboard URL (for example, `https://dashboard.hookdeck.com/cli/events/evt_x3H5QdAL2JGvxMbvqcvwK8UF`). Scroll to the **Body** section and open the **"Root"** > **"Data"** sections. Your new user's name and username appear under the **"target"** property:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Review the unique dashboard URL (for example, `https://dashboard.hookdeck.com/cli/events/evt_x3H5QdAL2JGvxMbvqcvwK8UF`). Scroll to the **Body** section and open the **"Root"** > **"Data"** sections. Your new user's name and username appear under the **"target"** property.
```

 ![A screen shot of the Hookdeck dashboard that includes body details.](/img/hookdeck-body-detail.png)

## See also

> For background conceptual information on Event Hooks, see [Event Hooks](/docs/concepts/event-hooks/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [Event Hooks](/docs/concepts/event-hooks/) for background conceptual information on Event Hooks.
```
